JUDY WOODRUFF: The push to ground the kind
of Boeing 737 jet that crashed this weekend
has grown around the world.
But here in the U.S., the FAA and the airlines
say they still believe in the plane's safety.
There's a fair amount of criticism and questions
about that decision.
John Yang begins with this report.
JOHN YANG: Dozens of countries, including
all nations in the European Union, have grounded
the Boeing 737 MAX 8 and banned them from
their airspace.
That's on top of at least 27 airlines that
have voluntarily taken the planes out of service.
The actions come two days after an Ethiopian
Airlines 737 MAX 8 crashed shortly after takeoff,
killing all 157 people on board.
Chinese officials said their ban would last
until U.S. regulators act.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesman
(through translator): The CAAC has clearly
stated that they will ask Chinese aviation
companies to lift the ban on commercial operation
of Boeing 737 MAX 8 unless they are assured
by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration
and Boeing company that they have taken related
measures to guarantee safe travel.
JOHN YANG: The FAA insists the planes are
safe.
They say they are closely watching the probe
of the Ethiopia crash.
U.S. investigators are on the ground, where
family and friends of the victims are sifting
through debris for remains and personal items.
Sunday's tragedy is the second deadly accident
in five months where a 737 MAX 8 crashed just
after takeoff.
In October, a Lion Air flight crashed, killing
all 189 people on board.
The cause is still under investigation.
Attention has focused on an automated flight
control feature designed to avoid what's called
a stall.
A stall can happen if a plane's nose points
too high and loses the ability to fly.
The 737 MAX 8's autopilot is designed to sense
when that is a danger and automatically push
the nose down.
Pilots can override the system by shutting
the autopilot off.
While insisting the plane is safe as it is
now, the FAA says it expects to order fixes
to the system no later than April.
The changes have reportedly been delayed by
disagreements between Boeing and federal regulators
about how extensive they should be.
About 350 Boeing 737 MAX 8's are in operation
worldwide; 58 of them are operated by two
U.S.-based airlines, Southwest and American.
Both carriers are continuing to operate the
jets.
On Capitol Hill, a growing number of lawmakers
say the FAA should ground the planes and look
into the issue.
Connecticut Senator Richard Blumenthal:
SEN.
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D), Connecticut: These
planes are accidents waiting to happen, until
there is some assurance that either pilots
have been better trained or the problems with
the aircraft have been fixed.
JOHN YANG: President Trump weighed in, saying:
"Airplanes are becoming far too complex to
fly.
Pilots are no longer needed, but, rather,
computer scientists from MIT."
But the president didn't publicly call on
the FAA to act differently.
We are joined by Mary Schiavo.
She is a former Transportation Department
inspector general.
She is now a lawyer representing survivors
and victims' families in airline accidents.
That includes a case against Boeing stemming
from the 2014 disappearance of Malaysia Airlines
Flight 370.
Mary Schiavo, thanks so much for joining us.
Just a little bit ago, the FAA put out a statement
repeating that they find no systematic performance
issues and no basis to order the grounding
of this aircraft.
What is your reaction to that?
MARY SCHIAVO, Former Transportation Inspector
General: Well, the two planes have already
crashed.
We don't know the cause yet of the second
one, and FAA's own warnings to Boeing concerning
the repairs that were needed after the Lion
Air crash said that there was a risk of impact
with terrain.
So, it's impossible to say that they're safe,
when two have already crashed and we don't
know why for the second one.
It's completely impossible, oxymoronic.
JOHN YANG: We should note that we asked the
FAA to give us someone to talk to, and they
turned us down.
But they say that that's precisely why, the
fact that they don't know the answer to what
caused these two crashes is precisely why
they are not ordering the grounding.
MARY SCHIAVO: Well, if you don't know why
planes are falling out of the sky, what you're
doing is betting with passengers' lives and
other lives that it won't happen again.
And that's not the purpose of safety regulations.
The purpose of safety regulations -- remember,
an aircraft certification says that the plane
is safe to fly.
It doesn't say, we don't know why it's falling
out of the sky, so we're going to leave it
there.
It's completely the opposite of what safety
regulators are supposed to do.
JOHN YANG: And the FAA also says, it's safe
the fly now.
But, at the same time, they're talking about
modifications to this stall-avoidance system.
And we're also told that there are discussions
between Boeing and the FAA about the parameters
of this fix.
Help us understand the relationship between
regulators and the regulated.
MARY SCHIAVO: Well, unfortunately, you know,
in the case of the FAA and Boeing and other
manufacturers and major carriers, it's a very
symbiotic relationship.
But the FAA has over the years really come
to defer to Boeing and other manufacturers,
Airbus, et cetera, and to the airlines.
And so on issues such as this, the FAA often
takes its cues and its direction from Boeing,
not for sinister reasons, not because somebody
is on the take, but because Boeing has the
greater expertise.
And, over the years, when I was inspector
general, we had many investigations, including
on the certification of the 777, that showed
that the FAA just didn't have the firepower,
didn't have the expertise and the training
and the ability to go toe to toe with Boeing
and other issues in manufacturers over complex
computer issues.
And that's what this is.
They put a computer modification on a plane
to keep it from stalling, didn't tell the
pilots and train them, and then after a second
one went down, now the FAA says they're going
to order Boeing to make changes to that computer
system by April.
So, in the meantime, is it safe?
Well, not according to the FAA.
It can cause impact with terrain.
JOHN YANG: Impact with terrain, a euphemism
for a crash.
You asked that question, is it safe?
You wrote in a blog today, earlier today,
that you wouldn't be comfortable flying on
this model aircraft.
Why?
MARY SCHIAVO: Well, because we don't know
why two have fallen out of the sky, and we
don't know why.
And to me that says you shouldn't be on it
until we do know why.
And they will very soon.
In some ways,this is just astonishing that
people have not been more proactive.
Those black boxes are the best there are.
They're the top-of-the-line models.
They're the newest ones.
They have probably downloaded them already.
And literally within a week, we will know
a cause and can say -- at that point, we can
say whether or not the airplane is safe.
At this point, it's the whole reason we have
a black box, to solve the mystery, so we can
say whether it's safe or not.
So, for me, no, I wouldn't get on it until
we know.
JOHN YANG: And what advice would you give
to the traveling public?
MARY SCHIAVO: Oh, the traveling public.
I mean, the Internet has blown up with this.
The traveling public is already searching
for their own and making their own decisions.
They're being smart consumers and voting with
their feet.
They're all asking, how do I find out if my
plane is one of these, and can I re-book,
get off, or cancel?
JOHN YANG: Mary Schiavo, former inspector
general at the Transportation Department,
thank you very much.
MARY SCHIAVO: Thank you.